[MUSIC]
>> Just look, looking around in
2005, 2006,
at the number of people applying to
study computer science, and just this
sudden horrible realization
that we had driven off a cliff.
And, you know, kind of like Wile E Coyote,
you know, we'd driven, we'd gone off
a cliff, and now we look down,
and, yeah, we're in real trouble.
So, so, yeah, it was just trying to
eke our way back towards that
1980s world, in which every
child who had wanted to be a
computer programmer
had a machine that they could
use to learn on.
Then there was this period of three or
four years, five years, where we were just
kind of grinding through iterating
different, first of
all iterating different processor
architecture choices, different vendors.
So we started off with something that
actually looked a lot like an Arduino.
Turns out you can take one of those.
We wanted it to be
a real computer, we wanted it to be a
computer with a user interface.
And it turns out you can take those
microcontrollers that are in,
in the Arduino, and you
can make them
generate a video signal if you,
if you clock them hard enough
and you write the right
software for them.
You can make them generate a
component video, a standard-definition
component video signal.
And so we started off.
I had a, I still have it, it's a piece of
aeroboard which is about that
sort of size,
which has a, an Atmel chip
on it and a block of SRAM.
And it gives you actually a very kind of a
1980s computer experience.
And the lovely thing about it is
because they're all 0.1-inch
through hole components,
you can build it yourself, you can
build it in
it takes about an afternoon,
a rainy afternoon.
You can go in with a piece of
aeroboard and
some chips come out with a, come out
with a computer.
And that seemed like a really nice idea,
but when you take it and
you show it to children, what you'll find
is they're not really, it's not exciting.
You know, it's not contemporary.
It's not, it's not modern.
You know, people, those computers
we got in 1980s,
we didn't necessarily get them
to learn to program on.
We got them to play games on, to,
got them to do other things with.
And they just, wheedled their way
into our lives.
Right?
They, they, they snuck into our lives and
once they were in our lives, then we
learned to program.
We didn't necessarily get them.
Yeah, and so, so really I think
probably most of that
five-year journey was about seeing if
we could reconcile
the idea of a $25 computer with a, with a
feature set that would make it
attractive to a modern child.
And another thing we found with all of these,
with that and with some subsequent
architectures we tried,
what we found, all of which were based on
kind of very special-purpose pieces of
hardware, you know.
What we found was we were having to
everything ourselves.
So we were, we were writing our
own SD card drivers,
and our own terminal software, and
our own keyboard drivers.
And, you know, you end up doing an enormous
amount of work because you've chosen to,
you have cheaped
out on some aspect of the hobby.
You're using some, some wacky DSP as your,
your processor.
You're writing this giant
software stack yourself.
And it was only really at the point
where we, getting, from
a point where we put an arm,
we were lucky enough.
So I, my day job for most of that period
has been working for,
working for a company called
Broadcom, they're a big famous
semiconductor company.
We make chips for communications.
Pretty much every communications
application has a, has a,
has a Broadcom chip.
And you know, we were, we're looking,
we were looking at a range,
we took the Raspberry Pi concept
through a series of
Broadcom chips, seeing whether we could
get something compelling.
And we were very lucky that towards the
end of that period,
one of these chips ended up with
an arm in it.
So we made that leap from a, from the
special-purpose world with us doing all
the work into a very general-purpose world
where really what we're making
is an arm-like Xbox.
And so we, we're a not-for-profit.
You know, our funding came from
a couple of us
throwing money in a hat,
you know, quite a lot of
money in a hat, but you know,
it was quite a big hat.
But you know, it was, that
seemed seemed appropriate.
But the thing that was really surprising
to us after we announced in 2011 after it
kind of almost leaked out, it was just kind
of a slip of the tongue, you know.
[LAUGH] We didn't, so we were
surprised by the level of interest.
And it became apparent to us that we
really weren't going to be able to
manufacture these.
We weren't going to be able to
manufacture them in anything like
the numbers that were going to be
required to suit the demand.
And that's why, you come see us,
if you go look back
at our web site, you see us in 2011
talking all about manufacturing.
And then towards the end of 2011,
start of 2012,
our entire business changes, so we become
a, a licensing company.
So what we are now is this very
capital-light licensing company.
We design this.
We, we work on the brand.
We work on the software.
We work on the hardware.
But all of the manufacturing, or the
capital provision, or
the logistics, they're all
provided for us by our partners.
We have a couple of partners,
RS components and Premier Farnell,
who are kind of multi-billion-dollar
electronic component distributors,
and that's really
the thing that's let us go to scale.
The really wonderful thing is
that we were able,
in terms of who does the
manufacturing, you
know, like everyone else, they don't
manufacture, they
commission manufacturing from a
third party, from a CEM.
The wonderful thing for us was that
last year
we were able to move back,
move our manufacturing back.
So we started building, like everyone else,
when you say I'm going to build
something cheap, where am I going to build
it? I'm going to build it in China.
And, over the course of the last year,
we've steadily reshored
manufacturing of these things
to a point where now 100% of these
are being built in South Wales.
So they're being built in the UK.
So that level of support, having these,
these kind of
big UK PLCs on our side has given us the
kind of level of volume and the
level of support
that we needed in order to really
make that happen.
>> What is really on this little
little chip?
That's like a whole, that's pretty much
it, right?
>> That's pretty much it and
really you can see the Raspberry Pi
almost as being a breakout
board for that chip.
So this chip's called BCM 2835,
it was designed here in Cambridge,
it was designed by the
by the team that I'm, I'm a member of
just about two miles away from here.
It's a, it was originally intended
as a coprocessor,
it was intended as a multimedia
coprocessor for a mobile phone.
So if you've got a mobile phone platform
that's performing well,
because maybe it's half way through
its life, and you want to
give it a little bit of a shot
in the arm and bring it up to, to
particularly maybe five years ago
when we were moving from
a world of really fairly simple
mobile phones to a
world in which every mobile phone is
expected to have
video playback and good camera processing
and 3D, 3D graphics,
this could be used as a shot in the
arm processor to allow you to
to bring an old platform up into,
up into the modern era.
And then the last one of them grew an arm.
So this thing already had a, already had
most of the other stuff you needed.
It could drive an HDMI display.
It could drive a standard-definition
display.
It could have a 3D accelerator
and a video accelerator and a
camera processor and some DSP
and a USB controller, which was kind
of a unusual feature to have in there.
And really, what we found was that we,
we were looking at this chip.
Man.
We are only an arm away.
You know?
We're only an arm core away
from this being a
a pro, a computer.
A single chip.
A single-chip computer.
So we were lucky enough to be able to get
an arm core into the,
the, the last step in the 2835, the final
productional step grew an arm 11.
And that's what allows us to relax.
The really interesting thing is being that
most of what, a lot
of what people have done with this, has
been hardware hacking, you know.
We have this, these GPIs here,
which for me were
kind of a little of an afterthought
in the design, but in practice a
lot of the cool stuff people have been
doing, adults and children,
have been about using this
as a machine.
Because you, you ask what can this, is
this just a cheap PC?
What can this do that a PC can't do?
And in a lot of ways it is just a
cheap PC.
But this stuff is something that,
you know, your most
expensive PC can't do without an
add-on, an add-on card.
And so people have been, you know,
taking these. They've been
putting them in boats, and they've been
putting them in planes,
and they've been putting them
under balloons
and sending them up to the edge of space.
And they've been using them to
automate their homes.
There's a wonderful example someone had
the other day of an augmented microwave.
He'd taken an old microwave and
completely overhauled the, the, the
user experience of using this microwave
so it had, like a new,
a new touch panel on, it had
voice commands, it had a
web interface so you could control it
from your IPad.
It had a bar code scanner, so you could
scan your, the product.
And he'd built a database of mapped bar
codes to cooking instructions,
so you could just scan it, put it in,
and it would cook it for you.
And he built this thing with a
Raspberry Pi, you know?
These, it's given people access to a kind
of a level of technology.
It's given people access to a
platform that they
can use to do all this really
amazing stuff.
And so it's wonderful because,
you know,
a lot of people doing this are
adults, right?
But the lovely thing is, a lot of these
things adults are doing with it
feed immediately into the range of
projects that are available for teachers.
We take this and we take it into schools,
and at the end of the lessons,
mixed-ability classes, you know,
at the end of the lessons
there's always a hard core of
kids, boys and girls,
who you have to basically pry this little
thing out of their hands.
Because, you know particularly if it's
their first experience at programming.
And even if they've done
something very simple, like
taken a, we, we often use like a
snake game, and even if they've done
very simple stuff
like change the color of the snake or make
the snake go a little bit faster,
that kind of power,
you can see it in their eyes.
You know, they are like, hang on a second,
I can make this machine do what I want.
And, and for some, for, for, for a sizable
minority of children, that's
a really, as it was for me, I think
a transformative experience.
[MUSIC]